We've done Options API,
these are the core functionality of
what most people are using it for.
And now it's time to hop on over
to the bridge to Composition API.
But again, the key thing here is
the bridge because we're not gonna go
fully into it yet.
We're gonna see kind of
the intermediary and
sort of learn the progression
from options to composition.
All right, so
let's take a look at our code.
Let me go open up restaurant page, okay?
So we've learned that when it comes to
integrating TypeScript with object API or
options API, we can see here we
had to do like define component.
We had to do some things
to pass it into like
the data to kind of make it look right.
And then especially when it came to prop,
we had prop types, wouldn't be nice things
are just little bit easier,
a little bit more native, right?
What if we want a more
standard JavaScript,
less of the guardrails that
options API provides for us.
And that's really where
composition API comes into play.
And so, the one thing I have to underscore
actually a lot right now, which I forgot
to animate to you, is that the composition
API does not replace the options API.
I know people love Buzzwords and things
going viral, and I think there was a blog
post where I think someone
was claiming it at one point.
So that message did become, it kind of
like pervaded throughout, unfortunately.
And the options API actually,
believe it or not,
is something that we can very
easily support as the Vue team.
Because underlying what we've written,
options API is basically one
style of writing components.
So when people are like,
this is gonna go away,
it's just a style of writing components.
There's nothing unique about what's going
on there because the composition API and
the options API are powered
by the same core library.
So I just need that to be just
keep pushing that message, so
people don't feel like, no,
my options API is going away.
No, it's not.
But there is another way to
help us solve other problems,
which we'll see in a little bit.
All right, so taking a look at this,
let's start to see what
composition API might look like.
So one of the things I mentioned
with composition API is that it
does things a little bit more
like vanilla JavaScript.
So for example, here with data we have
this function that's returning an object,
and then we have computed properties,
we have all these guardrails.
Let's take a look at what it might look
like inside of composition API instead.
And so the way that you know you're inside
composition API is through the setup
lifecycle hook.
So for those who come from Vue 2, you
might be familiar with mounted, created,
all those lifecycle hooks.
Setup is the first one that
runs at the beginning now of
all the component lifecycle methods.
And so what we are gonna do is we are just
gonna migrate our options API stuff into
composition API just to show you
where that progression is, so
that then later when we take that
next jump, it won't be so jarring.
So first thing first, we're gonna
start by setting up our reactive data.
And so remember what I said inside of
composition API is that everything
inside of here is vanilla JavaScript.
So in other words,
when you set up a const of filter text,
that is literally what it is.
It is a constant of filter text,
it's not gonna change,
it's not gonna be reactive because
this is vanilla JavaScript plan.
So what do we need?
We need to tell it that we
need some help from Vue.
And so the helper method that
we're gonna stick with for
this particular workshop is gonna be ref.
So think of a reactive reference,
that's what that is.
So we say, this is going to be a ref that
is an empty string, this tells us that,
okay, this is gonna be the equivalent
of this right here inside of our data.
So that's been moved.
Next we're gonna go ahead and
let's move restaurant lists.
So shall we?
So I'm gonna copy restaurant
lists over here, and
then I'm gonna const this as well.
const restaurantList =
a ref that's an array, so
this is a reactive array,
not array, yes, a reactive array.
Okay, finally,
we gotta move our showNewForm here.
So I'm gonna move that over here and
const showNewForm.
And this is not gonna be false, but this
will be a ref of false just like that.
And so now that we've deleted all this,
you'll notice now that we are in
a sort of untyped territory again.
Because when we look and
hover over filter text,
you'll see that now we have this new type
that's being inherited called a ref.
This is a reactive reference, so think
of this like when you were looking at
options API and you had data, and
methods, and all these specific types.
This is now saying that, okay, we know
how to handle this specific type of ref,
which is a reactive reference within Vue.
And so here you'll see that restaurant
lists actually does say, well, actually
similarly, let me detect the shape of the
objects I'm noticing inside of my array.
But we wanna go ahead and say, hey,
this is an array of restaurants.
So the way that we do
this is with typecasting,
just like we did before where we say
this should be a restaurant array.
And just like that, now we've gone ahead
and actually defined our ref correctly.
And so this should start to feel
a little bit more like TypeScript.
Okay, and then going forward,
here we have here we have a ref,
this is a Boolean, so
we're good on this end.
So you notice, though, that none of it is
actually showing up as being used, right,
saying, it's unused.
And that's because inside
of the setup function,
again we're in vanilla JavaScript land, so
we need to be a little bit more explicit.
And so we need to actually manually
return these specific variables,
whereas data just assumed
you're going to use them.
In the setup function, you might have
some that are private variables,
some that you wanna expose.
So we want you to be explicit in this
particular format of setup when it comes
to returning this stuff.
So once again,
I can return this showNewForm.
And now that I have this,
everything is now can feed into the
options API just like you normally would.
But again, we're learning more
about composition API, so
let's continue this journey and
migrate everything over.
So for computed properties,
now we have these reactive references.
We have a computer helper method, and
this is the computed helper method is just
like the ref where we're basically saying
this is gonna be a computed
property that's based on Vue.
So here, let's go ahead and grab this.
Let's start with number of restaurants,
that's the easiest one.
So number of restaurants here is
going to be a computed property.
So this is the helper computed,
and it's going to
be a function that returns
a reactive variable.
Now what you'll first notice though, is
that it's gonna yell at us because it say,
hey, wait a second,
where does filteredRestaurantList exists?
Well, it doesn't because this is not
working anymore, we're in vanilla
JavaScript land, this is not automatically
taken care of for us by options API.
But what we do have, we do have this,
wait, wait, what am I talking about?
That is because
filteredRestaurantList is here, and
then I'll show you what I'm
talking about in a second.
Okay, so I can do const = computed,
and then this is a function
that returns this stuff.
Now once again, we're still in a similar
problem though because as we notice,
this does not exist, thereforeTherefore it
can't find this restaurant list property.
But we know restaurant list
does exist right here, and so
your first thought might be while
we're in JavaScript land so easy.
I'm gonna go ahead and
just delete this, it should work.
It does not work, the reason for that
is because reactive references play on
basically an object definition syntax for
tracking reactivity and
proxies, which we're not gonna get into.
But basically, when you're using
composition API with reactive references,
particularly the ref helper,
you need to unpack the value.
Because otherwise,
it's just a constant you're working with,
this is why there's no filter.
And so if we add this .value
to our reactive reference,
you'll notice that suddenly
everything opens up.
It knows what the restaurant is,
it knows what to grab.
And so whenever using ref,
basically remember that you have this
dot value that you need to unpack.
And so for those who are new
to composition API though,
you might be thinking, that's kind of
weird, I don't know if I liked that.
Because in options API, it just worked,
right, this .restaurant list, good to go.
The thing about it is though, because
you're in sort of vanilla JavaScript land,
one of the benefits that the .value
actually affords you is that it does
make it very explicit to developers that
you're working with a reactive reference.
Because otherwise,
if you use the reactive helper method,
which I'll just show you real quick.
So if we say like const
todoItem = reactive, so
this is another helper method
where it might be like id: '123'.
Although actually,
let me just show you the text pastry.
Just as a reminder, we can use that and
just scaffold that, and
then title: 'Get milk', right?
The reactive object does allow you to just
go todoItem.title, and then it just works.
But if this were a ref,
you do need to do value.title.
And so some people will go, well,
then I'm just gonna use reactive, and
that's totally up to you.
Again, I've seen people go both ways on
this, it depends on you and your team.
I'm using ref just because I think that's
the one that tends to catch people off
guard when they're not used to using it.
So I want people to just get a little bit
more exposure and so that when you see it,
and you're working with it,
you're not confused.
But by all means,
if you wanna just use the reactive,
that's totally up to you as well.
Okay, so now that we have that,
we have this other issue, right?
Filter text doesn't exist.
Well, that makes sense because
we need to eliminate this and
just add .value that works.
And once again, delete that .value.
There we go.
So, now our filteredRestaurantList
computed property does work as expected.
And you can see here that it
actually tells you that, hey,
this is actually a type of computed ref.
So this is what's really nice about
getting into composition API when you're
working with Typescript is because you're
sure to get a lot more specific as far as
how things are being used.
Whereas an options API, it does depend
on where you put it in the code, and
then you kinda have to like trigger it
a little bit to work the way that you want
to with options.
This feels a little bit more like
natural TypeScript because again,
it's just a computer helper method, and
then you're defining a callback
function inside of here.
And then you're basically
defining the return here,
which is the list of restaurants.
And then basically, you're good to go.
All right, finally here, for
a number of restaurants,
we have a dependency on
the computed property.
Now remember what I said,
refs require you to unpack it.
So when we look at filteredRestaurantList,
it is a computed ref.
In other words, we actually do
need to unpack this as well.
So this is where .value also
needs to come into play.
And that's a little gotcha that some
people don't realize when you're learning
about ref and reactive Is that
because computer is using ref,
it also needs to be unpacked.
So then it's saying it's not being used,
so let's go ahead and add that real quick.
So let's see.
filteredRestaurantList and
then wait, did I miss type it?
I think I did.
There you go.
And then we have the number
of restaurants, okay?
Great, all right, that means computed
has been successfully migrated.
Now we're gonna go ahead and finish this
up, or actually with two more steps.
Let's go ahead and move our methods in.
So methods, right, they got this special
name when it came to options API, but
really, all they are in
JavaScript are functions.
That's really all they are.
So I'm just gonna grab all three here and
use a multi cursor editing to
save us a little bit of time.
And so here, let me just delete that,
delete that, okay?
So here one, two, three, so
we have a const of these three functions,
we will declare it like this, and
then we'll make it an arrow function.
And then already basically these are the
functions that we're going to be calling,
although this got deleted somehow.
And then let's go ahead and
fix all this up.
So there we can delete
restaurantList.value switch.
hideForm is gonna refer to this hideForm,
so there's no point for this.
And then once again, we can grab that,
switch it out to .value, this also .value.
Great, and so you see here actually, this
is, again we're TypeScript can be super
helpful is that without the .value
if you forget to unpack it.
You can see already that it says that
I don't know what I'm unpacking here,
there's an any here for some reason.
And so that yelling at me
reminds me I need the value.
Great, and then once again,
showNewForm is just a ref.
So there we go.
And then we need to expose all this stuff,
so deleteRestaurant hideForm.
And then the last one was addRestaurant,
okay?
Finally, one last bit as we migrate this
over is that we need the ability to call
the mounted life cycle hook because we're
again, I wanna show that transition over.
So one of the things we've done as
a convention inside of Vue is that we
provided you helper methods, right?
That's what we've been doing this whole
time, ref computed all that stuff.
So we have this thing called,
basically life-cycle hooks, so
onMounted which is a life-cycle hook
that we can import as you can see here,
it's being imported directly from Vue.
This is what actually allows us to
then call those lifecycle hooks.
So onMounted here, and then we basically
pass in the callback function that will
run on that specific one.
What are we gonna do?
Okay, so this is where some people
get tripped up because this
is where we now sort of enter
the land of composable.
If you haven't heard that term before,
basically it's a unique term to any
sort of composition API module.
So anytime someone uses a function that
creates like an example like router,
any sort of function,
it uses composition API.
They're currently being termed as
composable because they're external
modules that use composition API.
I don't know,
I have mixed feelings on the name, but
it seems to be sticking,
so that's what it is.
And so in this particular case, you'll
notice that onMounted what we're doing
here is we're checking for the route.
And if the route has
a query parameter of new,
we're actually showing
the new form basically.
So it's like a hack over
rather doing direct routing.
So how do we actually get this, right?
Because now there's no
more global properties.
This is one of the things I think that
scares people a little bit when moving
from options API to composition API is
that there's a lot of guardrails that
options this gives you automatically,
especially when it comes to
globally inherited stuff.
And so the way this works actually is
that, especially with Vue 3 going forward,
with all the libraries being
TypeScript friendly, and
we wanna be composition API friendly.
In addition to being options API friendly,
is that we have this
prefix in composable that's being
used a lot, inadvertently called use.
So what we can do is, since we
wanna grab the link from the route,
we wanna grab something from Vue router.
So if I scroll up here, I can import
something called useRoute from vue router.
And so if you're thinking of like, well,
how would I know to use like use route?
We try to actually follow conventions of
what you would expect from the global API.
So sometimes you might want router things,
so that will be used router, right,
if you see using this .$ router.
So use routes here is what's gonna
basically allow you to get all the things
that you would normally
get from this .$.route.
So if I do useRoute like this, this will
actually then grab the route for me.
And then I can swap this
out now which is route,
and then I can swap this out with .value.
And that is everything when it comes
to migrating to the composition API.
And so as we can see now,
we can actually delete this part here.
And so we have this nice, isolated
module of JavaScript that's leveraging
TypeScript, and then it's done in
a way that can be freely organized.
And this is what composition API really
does offer in comparison to options API
is that now when we're looking at
this code, we can go, all right, so
this is managing restaurants, right?
So in the past, right,
this is essentially the methods section.
This was the lifecycle section,
and then we had computed here.
And then we had all our data here.
But because we're in free
form composition API then,
we can actually start thinking like,
you know what, actually,
I think it makes more sense to group
all like the restaurant stuff together.
So I'm gonna take the restaurant here,
group that with this,
cuz I think this makes more sense
that we established the ref.
First, I'm gonna call this Restaurant
Module, we have the list of data,
we filter that data, and
then we can even manage that data.
So I can do like that.
And then number of restaurants actually
is relevant, so we'll keep it there.
But then we have all this form stuff,
right, and
this stuff we can really just
say this is the New Form Module.
And then we can just say, well, for
now the life cycle hook is related to this
if not doing anything
else different with it.
So we'll grab that, and
then we'll grab this to stuff too here.
And now we have stuff organized by
feature rather than by their concerns or
how they're functioning.
Is there a better best practice?
No, it is entirely up to your team.
However, as you might have noticed though,
because we're in vanilla JavaScript land,
this does open us up to then
creating the composable.
In other words,
we could export these chunks of code into
individual JavaScript or TypeScript files,
and then share them amongst components.
And that's where it starts to get really
powerful with composition API is that
reusability piece.
Because with options API, you were
limited to using essentially mixins,
which was prone to errors as
far as like naming things, and
then you have to worry about
things overriding a certain way.
But because everything here in composition
API is very declarative, you know exactly
when you're importing something from
a specific file, what it's being named, or
you can rename it if it has
a conflict with that specific file.
And you don't have to deal with all the
assumptions that the options API can often
provide for you, which again,
can be helpful in certain contexts.
But in the context of reusability of code,
the mixins definitely became a fun one for
a lot of people that we learned.